Happy Sabbath, everyone.
It's always wonderful to be in the house of God on this, His holy Sabbath day.
Life is chaotic.
And if you just watch the news, your blood pressure will go up.
So it is always good to pull away and turn off the world and focus on eternity.
And that is one of the things I love about the Sabbath.
There is no relationship that grows without time.
A mother will never know her child if she does not spend time nurturing her child.
A father will not know his children if he does not spend time with his children.
Husband and wife will never get along or never know each other if they don't spend time together.
So God before sin ever entered the world set aside time for us to spend with him.
That's how beautiful the Sabbath is.
It is a statement
of relationship with God.
And so I was going to preach something else, but after this week, you know, as I've been wrestling with things this week, God brought this to me.
And so we're going to do this today.
Our scripture reading is just read.
So wonderfully by our president here, 2 Timothy 1 7 says, for God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power and of love.
and of a sound mind.
Our message today is entitled, The Prayer Shift for 2026.
The Prayer Shift for 26.
Let's pray, Father God, we thank you for this opportunity to study your word.
And I ask once again, Lord, that you just make me a nail on the wall, a rusty nail, Lord.
But upon that nail, I ask that you hang
a portrait of Jesus Christ.
Let Eric Walsh not be seen or heard today, Lord.
We need to hear a word from you.
And Lord, we ask this in the precious and holy name of Jesus.
Amen.
We start after 10 plagues have hit the great ancient kingdom and empire of Egypt.
There was really nothing like Egypt and probably never will be again, even today,
They cannot figure out how the pyramids were built.
With such incredible precision, aligned perfectly with certain stars and on certain sides so that when the sun would strike certain points in the air, things would happen.
The Egyptians were a superior civilization in architecture and mathematics.
and science, even medicine.
We often quote Hippocrates, but you fail if you do not go further back to a man named Imhotep, who long before Hippocrates actually was coming up with many of the things that we use even today in natural remedies.
But the Egyptians had a problem.
The Egyptians did not serve the God of heaven.
Their success corrupted them.
They enslaved the people of God for hundreds of years.
And when God finally decided that he was going to set his people free, he sent a man named Moses.
Now, Moses wasn't your typical hero.
At 40 years old, Moses was in line to either be a pharaoh in the future of Egypt or at least a great general in Egypt.
But instead, he knew by his
upbringing by his mother, a miraculous upbringing that he was going to liberate the children of Israel.
And so instead of waiting for God to show him how to do it, Moses was a gangster.
He took a man straight out, killed a man and had to flee and run after 40 years of training in Egypt.
He spent the next 40 years watching sheep.
And I want to submit to you that the education he got with the sheep was more important than the education he got in Egypt.
He unlearned a lot of what he learned and learned to rely on God so that he becomes a Bible hero at the ripe young age of 80 years old.
Don't tell me it's too late for you to start doing something for God.
But Moses had the struggle of dealing with the children of Israel.
the people of God.
And when Moses goes to set the people free, there are trials and problems.
Ten plagues hit Egypt.
It is a miraculous escape.
Finally, even Pharaoh's own son is taken out and he tells them, get out of Egypt.
So powerful is this exodus that when they are leaving, the Egyptians hand over their riches.
As the children of Israel begin to walk, they celebrate
But it doesn't last long.
The children of Israel cannot learn the lesson of the miracles God has already done for them.
So Exodus 14 and verse 10, the Bible says, and when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lifted up their eyes and behold, the Egyptians marched after them.
and they were sore afraid and the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord.
God had already smoked Egypt with 10 plagues.
Each plague represented one of the Egyptians gods so that you could see that the God of heaven was the superior one God.
But when they are on their way out, they look back and they can see the Pharaoh and his armies coming after them.
The Bible says that they are not afraid, they are
so afraid.
I want to ask somebody today, have you ever felt like Pharaoh's coming after you?
In verse 11, and then said Moses because, and then they said to Moses, these are the children of Israel now, because there were no graves in Egypt, have you taken us away to die in the wilderness?
Wherefore have you dealt with us to carry us forth out of Egypt?
The people turn on their liberator.
And they get angry with Moses and say, listen, why did you even bother taking us out of Egypt?
The answer is actually quite simple, because you were slaves in Egypt, because they beat you in Egypt, because you worked from can't see morning to can't see night in Egypt.
And we wanted you needed to be set free.
But when they were afraid, you've got to get this to get the whole message.
When they were afraid, they began to forget how bad they used to be.
verse 12 it's not this is the children of Israel still speaking it's not this the word we to tell you in Egypt saying let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians for it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians than that we should die in the wilderness I mean ungrateful he gets them out
Miraculous.
I mean, they've seen the miracles happen.
They put the blood on the, the lamb blood blood on the posts of their doors.
They saw the angel pass over them.
They saw and heard the cries of the Egyptians as their firstborn died and the, and the children of Israel, their firstborn lived.
And now at the first sign of trouble, they begin to doubt God and question him.
There's something physiologic.
about doubt.
Three things I want you to get about doubt.
The first one is that doubt is contagious.
If one person starts to doubt, it spreads like a virus.
If you've ever played team sports,
I played high school football and we won a state championship my freshman year.
And one of the things you learn is if you're going to play a team and on the bus on the way there, if one man on the bus says, I heard about this team, I'm not sure we can beat them.
That thing spreads like a virus.
They start telling you how big their linebackers are.
how fast their cornerbacks are, how smart their quarterback is, and while you're going over there, you start shaking.
You ain't even seen them yet.
Doubt is contagious.
Watch this.
And that is in frivolous, meaningless high school football.
Imagine what happens when doubt enters the house of God.
But the second thing doubt is, is that doubt is addictive.
It feeds itself.
There is a, there is a certain amount of comfort that comes from beginning to believe the worst by not having to have the motivation, the dopaminergic stimulation to remain motivated.
It becomes addictive.
You begin to fall back into doubt as your safe place.
And so now you don't just doubt regularly.
You allow doubt to feed you and you become more of a warrior than a warrior.
The third thing doubt is it's amnestic.
Watch this.
It erases truth from your memory.
I'm going to go a little bit deeper in this.
If you begin to doubt, it changes how you remember.
The one of the reasons Satan wants you doubting is because he wants you to forget how good God has been to you in the past.
Watch this.
The immediate brain response when you have doubt and negative thoughts is that it activates the brain's threat system.
This is the fight or flight system, the sympathetic nervous system.
It is all activated and turned on.
We used to just say fight or flight.
Now we say fight, flight, freeze or fawn.
We've got all these words for it.
But what it basically means is that the sympathetic nervous system takes over and the part of your brain where logic and reasoning is supposed to happen is shut off.
One of the reasons that happens is because the amygdala, the part of your brain
where emotions are stored as it turns this thing on it begins to throw gas into the emotional engine of your brain and you begin to speed off and the next one the next bullet is the prefrontal cortex right here where reasoning is supposed to happen if the amygdala is the gas pedal the prefrontal cortex is supposed to be the brakes
It is because you are able to reason.
How important is reasoning for the Christian?
Isaiah 1.18 says, come let us reason together, says the Lord.
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow.
Though they were like crimson, they shall be as wool.
Watch this.
If you can't reason, you can't be saved.
And so the devil wants to make you unreasonable.
He wants you to start doubting.
So you remember all that went wrong and forget all that went right.
Survival mode replaces clarity and thoughtfulness.
So there's a whole cascade of things that begin to happen.
This is, I remember this, the whole, a big chunk of the people of Israel.
They were a mixed multitude.
It wasn't just the children of Israel.
Many of the Egyptians said, well, listen, if their God could whoop our gods, I'm following them.
So now you got this mixed one.
The cortisol levels all go up.
Stress hormone goes up, which, look at that first bullet there.
It says memory impairment.
The devil wants you to forget or to remember in a way that is not accurate.
The second thing is your dopamine goes down.
You have reduced motivation and pleasure.
And what the devil does is I was going to preach a sermon called the stress equation and stress equals demands minus resources.
Stress equals your demands minus the resources you have.
And so God gives you good resources, but the devil throws you bad resources.
like marijuana, alcohol, pornography, addictive foods.
He starts to throw you that stuff because in your doubt and your fear, you are looking to find a way to regain pleasure.
Doubt has stolen from you.
The serotonin drops, your mood becomes unstable.
And over time, if you are doubting and fearful and negatively thinking, your emotional resilience weakens.
In other words, you lose emotional maturity.
Your emotional quotient, which is not like your, which is like your intelligence quotient, but your emotional quotient, your ability to be resilient in this life begins to dissolve.
Now watch this.
What happens is, and I want you to just see a couple of quick things here, the hippocampus growth and learning slow under chronic stress was harder to learn when you're in this situation.
Your confidence pathways weaken.
You can see that on the right side of that slide.
The brain learns what it repeatedly practices.
So as you do this, it's like a loop form.
But look at on the bottom, the left side, middle of the slide.
Fail your memories, strengthen faster than success memories.
This thing blew me out of the water.
As you begin to doubt and think negatively, your failure memories come to you more often
than the memories where God delivered you.
Because in order to feed the loop, your brain must suppress all the times God has worked miracles for you.
Let me give you an example.
I tell a story all the time.
I was at Oakwood at Adventist University, and I went home for Christmas break.
I knew better than to go to the nightclub.
I knew better.
But I went anyway and my cousin and I went to one of them and it was a Jamaican party.
So if anybody, nobody's thinking about that, you know, you better be quick to duck and run if you know what you know what you're doing.
And we went to the club down on Miami beach.
I should have been home.
I knew better.
And I was with my cousin Andrew and I was walking behind him.
And as we were walking across the club, he was in front of me and I stepped on some guy's foot.
and kept walking.
The guy picked up a Heineken bottle.
Why are you making people like German beer?
He picked up a Heineken bottle and he busted it over the head of the guy behind me.
He thought the other guy stepped on his foot.
And a big fight broke out in the club.
Now, I learned later on the guys whose foot I stepped on was what they call it back then in Germany.
They say, I don't know.
He was a big time drug dealer.
And literally could have had us put to kill that night.
And sometimes when I start to doubt God, I remember that moment because in my foolishness, I was where a child of God should never have walked.
And watch this.
And yet God delivered me.
You know what the Bible says?
Why we were yet sinners.
Christ died for us.
The devil wants you to forget the times God delivered you.
Now look at this.
This is the negativity loop.
So what happens is the negative thought appears, you activate the stress response, clear thinking and confidence decline, thought feels true, even if it's inaccurate and more negative thoughts appear.
It is like a flywheel.
And this has got to be broken.
And that's what we're going to talk about.
So look at verse 13 Exodus 14, 13 says, and Moses said unto the people, fear ye not.
I love Moses.
Moses just steps in and he breaks the cycle.
Stop being afraid.
and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will show you today for the Egyptians whom you have seen today.
You shall see them again.
No more forever.
The Lord, watch this.
The Lord shall do what?
Fight for you.
And ye shall hold your peace.
The problem for some of us is we think we need to fight the armies of the Egyptians.
The Bible says, stand still, Moses tells them.
Watch what's gonna happen.
You're gonna see salvation today.
The Egyptians that are chasing you now, you're never gonna see them again.
I came to sell somebody today.
The Egyptians, the problems, the trials of life, the difficulties you're facing right now, if you stand still and let God fight, God can vanquish them so you never see them again.
You see, without faith,
In God, trials bring out the worst in us.
Doubt brings anger, isolation, and confusion.
That's why Hebrews 11 and verse six says, but without faith it is impossible to please him.
For he that comes to God must believe that he is and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
So what the devil wants to do is remove faith from you.
He wants to extract it.
We talked about that this week, that everyone is given a measure of faith.
All of us have some and faith works like muscles.
If you resistance train a muscle, it gets bigger.
If your faith is tried, it gets stronger.
So the devil gives you doubt.
He wants you to not believe.
And so to make the point
God actually puts a whole another chapter that refers back to the story later in the Bible, in the book of Psalms.
And the author of this Psalm is a man named Asif.
He was the chief musician for King David.
At this time, the nation was in a crisis.
The Bible does not tell us what crisis the nation was in.
But in this Psalm, it explains not only what happened in Exodus, it explains how you and I can gain victory today when doubt creeps up on us.
Psalm 77 in verse one, Asaph says, I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice, and he gave ear unto me.
The prayer starts with him giving you this synopsis that look, I prayed to God, I cried to him, and he listened to me.
And I want you to get this.
These are the preludes to the stages of doubt.
So before you get to the stages of doubt, this is where you start.
Every one of us starts here.
You start with your pre-trial understanding of who God is.
what you are raised to believe, how you think about God, who God is for you.
You start with your pre-trial understanding of God.
Then the second thing you do is you seek God based on that understanding when trial or trouble is coming.
So you're raised and understand God.
You see God a certain way.
And sometimes how you see God is affected by how you were raised.
A lot of people, if they didn't have a good relationship with your father's study shows, it's difficult for them to see God the father right.
It tells you how important it is for us as men to handle our homes properly.
Amen.
But look at this.
This is a great study.
And it was actually turned into a book by Paul Feroes and Christopher Bader.
The name of the book is America's Four Gods.
I don't know if you heard, I actually talked about this last time I was here.
And there are four ways Americans see God.
When they did this poll, they saw that 32% of Americans see God as authoritarian.
He's really just a CEO in the sky.
He's El-Hefe.
He's just a boss.
That's who God is.
The second way is that they see God as critical.
He's just waiting for you, watching you to see if you mess up.
And they actually try and put this attribute on Santa Claus, who is the opposite of God.
Somebody ought to say amen.
He sees you when you're sleeping.
He knows when you're awake.
He knows if you've been good or bad, so be good for goodness sake.
That's how some people see the God of heaven.
That's not how he functions.
The third one, the blue, is 24% distant.
There are a lot of people who they see God and they think of God as super far away from them.
He's just out there somewhere.
He's not close to me.
In fact, in some of the books I've read on Islam, some of them say that's true.
Their God is far from them.
But only 23% of Americans who claim to be Christians got this description right.
It is that he is benevolent, that he is
Love.
Let me get this, let me make this plain right here.
We are coming upon a time of trouble, Jesus says.
In Matthew 24, it says that we are about to come back.
Matthew 24, eight says, all these are the beginning of sorrows.
Everything we've seen so far, the wars, the famines, the pestilences, it's just the beginning of sorrows.
We're heading into a true time of trouble where the people of God are going to be tried.
And I want to submit to you that you will not make it through the time of trouble if you don't actually understand God's character.
You won't make it.
The reason the three Hebrew boys could stand in front of a fiery furnace.
The reason they could stand there and the most powerful man on earth and still stand there and serve God and be willing to go into the fiery furnace is because the three Hebrew boys knew God's character.
I want to tell you and submit.
If you don't know his character, you're in trouble.
The whole great controversy, the whole argument between God and a Christ and Satan, God and the fallen ones, the whole argument is over God's character.
And so they're constantly trying to give you a wrong picture of who God is.
So look at this.
They're the stages of doubt.
So we did the preliminaries or the preludes.
Here's the actual stages.
The first thing that happens when the devil's trying to bring you into doubt is that a trial hits.
You get the diagnosis.
You get the papers that your spouse wants to divorce.
You get the news that you've lost a loved one.
The trial hits and it is not a simple trial.
It is an overwhelming one.
It is the type of trial that feels like you've been hit by a freight train.
Isaiah says in Psalm 77.2, in the day of my trouble, I sought the Lord.
My soul ran in the night.
That means he was in pain.
He was in, he was in perplexity all night and it ceased not.
It wouldn't stop.
He said, my soul refused to be comforted.
Something hits you so bad that it knocks your sleep from you.
The second stage of doubt is that you feel pain, discomfort and you react, watch this,
with complaining.
Psalm 77.3 says, I remembered God and was troubled.
I complained and my spirit was overwhelmed.
And remember what happens as you begin to complain.
The scripture says, life and death is in the power of the tongue.
The Hebrew word for tongue there is like a hand going out and forming something.
So as you complain, as you get angry, as you're mad at God, it feeds that loop we just talked about.
It feeds it and feeds it.
And it winds you up and winds you up.
And instead of you battling doubt, you feed
the doubt.
Step three, you become overwhelmed at the lack of resolution.
So you say, I serve God, this problem should go away like this.
Whatever it is that just hit, it should disappear now.
But I have learned that that's not how God works.
Look at Psalm 77.
I'll read three and four.
I complained and my spirit was overwhelmed.
Say, La verse four, thou holdest mine eyes waking.
I am so troubled
that I cannot speak.
Spirit of prophecy is a great quote.
It says that sometimes when we are in trials, God leaves us there until we learn the lesson the trial is trying to teach us.
There are many people who the trial just doesn't seem to leave and it's because we do not submit ourselves to the lesson.
You know what I've learned to do when trial hits me?
Lord, what are you trying to teach me?
What is in my character that needs to be removed?
You're putting me through this fiery furnace, Lord.
You're putting me through this crucible Lord.
What is it that you're trying to melt off of my character?
What dross is there in Eric Waltz?
Because it's not common in Christianity, Christendom in general to say this anymore, but that God is asking and expecting of us to be like him.
Read Ephesians five.
Read where it talks about husband and wife and the church says, Paul says, the husband ought to be like Christ who gave himself for the church.
Why did he give himself for the church?
So the church could be sanctified and holy without spot or blemish or any type of wrinkle.
And so what does he do?
He allows you to go into trial.
Revelation 319, Jesus speaking through John the revelator, Jesus actually says it himself, all those whom I love,
I rebuke and chasing, be zealous therefore and repent.
And I have learned when the rebuke and the chasing comes, rather than feeling sorry for myself, I fall on my knees and say, Lord, teach me.
And if I'm recalcitrant and if I'm, I'm stubborn, Lord soften me.
Verse number four.
You think of better times and search for the God of those times when you're going through doubt.
So now you're doubting and say, well, where is God?
Psalm 77.5 says, I've considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.
I call to remembrance my song in the night.
I commune with my own heart and my spirit made diligent search.
He seeks for a God that is good based on circumstances.
This is the danger.
When you go to a lot of church, the big move now in Christianity is very emotional, very feel good.
I got to go to church and get my praise on.
But we don't, what a lot of Christians don't understand is Christianity and the entity is not a feel good religion.
All those who live a godly in Christ Jesus, the Bible says will do what?
Suffer persecution.
And yet there are churches that say, no, you're not going to go through no tribulation.
The church is going to be raptured away.
Let me tell you something.
God is going to purify his church and that is never pleasant.
Number five, stages of doubt.
You begin to question God's goodness.
Psalm 77 seven will the Lord cast off forever.
Asaph writes and will he be favorable?
No more powerful.
He starts to question whether or not God is even good.
If God was good, why did this happen to me?
Why did this happen to my family?
Why did we get this diagnosis?
If God is so good, why did this person die?
And you start to question his goodness.
Now you're deep in the stages of doubt because you questioned God as Satan questioned him.
The sixth one, you begin to question God's word.
Psalm 77.8 says, is his emergency clean gone forever?
Is his mercy clean gone forever?
Does his promise fail forevermore?
And I tell you one of the best weapons you've got against the devil is the word of God and the promises.
When the devil comes at you like a flood, the spirit of the Lord will lift up a standard against him.
When the devil came against Jesus, Jesus says it is written.
If you begin to question the promises of God, you become spiritually powerless.
And so what you've got to learn to do is stand on the promises.
Look at the seventh level of stages of doubt.
Number seven, you begin to questions God's ability to save at all.
Asaph writes Psalm 77.9, he says, has God forgotten to be gracious?
Has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?
He questioned God's mercy and his grace.
And if you loud doubt to get you, you get to a place where you start saying, man, God isn't even gracious.
Your doubt begins to paralyze your relationship with God.
You begin to detach and now Satan feel like he has you because once you do this detachment, he can send you into a life of sin.
Verse 10.
And I said, this is my infirmity.
But I will remember the years of the right hand of the most high.
Look how the Amplified Bible reads this.
And I said, this is my grief that the right hand of the most high, look at this, has changed.
And his loving kindness is withheld.
You start to see God different.
You say he has changed.
He's not what they say he is.
And this is the eighth and deepest step into doubt.
You begin to believe that God has changed
or that he is purposefully withholding his love and kindness.
And this sends you into complete rebellion against God.
And the problem is if you rebel against God, you become a servant of Satan.
Egypt in prophecy, when you study Bible prophecy and you look at Revelation chapter 11 in the word Egypt shows up there in the prophecy, Egypt represents sin.
God is trying to free us from sin and we have to go through the wilderness to get to the promised land.
We've got to come out of sin to get to the promised land.
But what the devil wants to do is make you feel like it would be more comfortable to stay in sin than to come out and follow God through the wilderness.
But once we begin to believe that God is not trustworthy, that he can go back on his word, that he can change
we begin to drift into great darkness.
And let me submit to you as a physician, this is why the anxiety and depression rates are so high in this country.
This is why we have so much drug addiction.
Do you know Americans make up 5% of the world's population?
Last time I checked, we consume 95% of the world's opioids.
There's a reason every year, in some years, I mean during a pandemic, 100,000 people die of drug overdose in this country.
I talk a lot about marijuana with young people.
I think one of the word in Colorado led the way.
Well, you guys are pioneers on that one, brother.
I tell people all the time, you know, this, this release of marijuana legalized recreational marijuana 20, I think it's up to 24 States now, or maybe more.
have legalized marijuana, and we don't realize what's really happening.
We have sent people into the darkness.
They've drifted away from God, and now they have to find another way to find fulfillment, because God made the human heart so big, only He can fill it.
You try to fill it with sex or pornography or drugs and alcohol, and that's what the world does.
And so the world slides down further and further.
And as the consequences of sin catch up with the world, the hollowness, the emptiness, and all of this happens, what we do in much of the healthcare world is what we try to do is medicate you out of your hollowness.
But it's an impossibility.
There is no pill that can fill the space Christ has in you.
And so the psalmist, Asaph, switches.
In the middle of the psalm, something happens.
There's a prayer shift in Psalm 77.
It is one of the most amazing psalms.
If you just stopped the psalm there, you'd be in trouble.
But something happens.
There's a shift at this point.
Asaph, in his trouble, changes the very nature and direction of his prayer.
This prayer shift holds a key to dealing with doubt.
It is a secret to successful prayer and power in time of trial.
There's a prayer shift that has to happen.
And in 2026, as we see prophetically, what is going on in the world.
Let me tell you something.
We are seeing things happen now that we have been talking about for years.
Things that we have been ridiculed as a church for believing.
Now it is on paper and about to become policy.
We are watching it happen, church.
And we have got to get to a place where we are willing to stand the fire for the God who loves us.
Psalm 7711 says this, I will remember the works of the Lord.
Surely I will remember thy wonders of old.
You remember what I said happens when you begin to have the negative thoughts and the doubt?
What is one of the things that happens physiologically, neurophysiologically?
You begin to, the way your brain works, it suppresses all of the memories that would go against your doubt and negative thinking.
It begins to suppress the thoughts that you will remember.
Let me tell you, let me give you an example.
You forget how it felt when you first held your child.
You forget what it was like when you and your spouse had a great vacation or when you came to the Lord.
Those memories are suppressed.
And what Asaph, the Psalmist here does is he intentionally, don't miss this, he makes a conscious decision to remember God's goodness.
And so in Psalm 7711 he says, I will remember the works of the Lord
Surely I will remember thy wonders of old.
I tell you that we have nothing to fear for the future unless we forget the way God has led us in the past.
So how do you make the shift?
Number one, focus on who God is by focusing on what he has done.
And what this means is your healing begins
when your memory of God's goodness replaces the devil's rumination of all the bad that's happened.
The devil wants you to ruminate like a cow's stomach turns grass over and over and over again.
He wants you to turn over those negative feelings.
When I worked in addiction medicine, we call that playing a tape in your mind.
So the devil wants to play the tape of how you are abused, play the tape of how you are neglected, play the tape of how you are mistreated.
He wants you to play that tape over and over again.
I came to tell you today, reject the thoughts the devil is trying to put in your head.
So when you pray, it's one of the big secrets to praying powerfully.
Start your prayers not with your complaints, but with an acknowledgement of who God is.
I mean, when I pray the first thing I do, I sit and I come up, I thank God.
In fact, I've learned that it is prudent to spend more time in thanking him than in asking him for anything.
Because here's what happens.
The more you thank him, the more tangible his power is in your mind.
And by thanking God, you break the doubt cycle.
And you can't watch this.
You can't go to God praying in doubt.
How do you have to pray to him in faith?
So what do you do to make sure that as you move through the prayer, the things you do to make sure that when you get to the part of the prayer, when you make your request, that you've lined things up.
The first thing is you thank him.
Sometimes you just thank him, say, we were walking the other night across this beautiful campus and I'm telling you, I've always lived in the city and the clouds weren't there and the sky was clear.
And I'm telling you the stars, I felt like I could reach out and grab one.
The moon was so bright and clear and I was walking and I just had to in my heart just say, thank you Jesus because the world would want you to believe all of that is an accident.
That was some big bang.
No, there was no big bang.
There's a big God that created it.
When you're thankful, things change church verse 11.
Of Psalm 77, I will remember the works of the Lord.
Surely I'll remember the wonders of old verse 12.
I will meditate also of all thy work and talk of all thy doings.
You see, you can't interpret God by your feelings.
You've got to know God and let that interpret your feelings.
Your feelings need to be dependent on who God is, not on how you feel.
So I will also meditate also of all thy work and talk of thy doings.
And so you got to go back into the word.
This is why these stories are in the Bible.
Did you know that?
That's why the stories are here.
Let me tell you something, a story like David and Bathsheba, you look at a story like they say, what, who in their right mind would write that story and put it in the Bible?
Why would you put in the Bible that the guy who slew Goliath cheated with Bathsheba?
That makes no sense.
That's one of the ways you know the Bible is true, because it does not edit out the negative like that.
But here's why it's in there, because you get to see David go through what he went through as a consequence of that sin, and in Psalm 51, watch his restoration.
So that if you have fallen, you can look to that story and realize, I can still get up and go back to God.
I will meditate on his work.
You know the greatest work God does in this world?
the restoring of souls to Christ.
Number two, making the shift.
The second thing from that verse, tell others.
When you pray, you've got to pray with the testimony in mind.
You don't just pray.
You pray so that when you're done praying, what happens to you, you can use to glorify God.
That's the secret.
You see, people say, well, if it's God's will, well, it's God's will if it's going to glorify Him.
And so you got to say, Lord, I pray that you bring me through this situation, take me through this trial so that when I'm done, you are the one who is glorified.
Revelation 12 11 says it like this.
And they overcame him by the blood of the lamb and by the word of their testimony.
And they love not their lives unto death.
You've got to have a testimony.
The other secret to powerful praying, I'll throw it here, because it's here, is that they overcame by the blood of the lamb.
Did you know that when you pray, you ought to do like a sanctuary prayer?
I'll come back to that.
But here's the thing, before you go deep into prayer, after you thank God, the next thing you need to do is ask Him to remove your sin.
Because if you go before God with unrepentant sin and make requests, it bounces off the ceiling.
That means you gotta spend significant time in your private prayer confessing your sins to God.
and asking for the blood of Jesus Christ to wash you and make you clean.
And let me tell you something, his blood still washes, it still cleanses.
I say this all the time, people take their clothes and throw it in the washing machine, they throw in tide, and they throw in bleach, and they turn on the washing machine, turn around and walk off.
How many people wonder if the tide of the bleach is working?
But you question the blood of Jesus Christ.
Some of us have more faith in tide and Clorox than we do in the blood of Christ.
Why do you want to share your testimony?
Because of how we learn.
William Glaser, Glaser talks about this.
You'll remember 10% of what you read, 20% of what you hear, 30% of what you see, 50% of what you see and hear, 70% of what you discuss with others, 80% of what you experience personally.
Watch this, but you'll remember 95% of what you teach someone else.
Psalm 77, 13 says this, thy way oh God is in the sanctuary.
Who is so great a God as our God?
Thou art the God that do us wonders.
Thou hast declared thy strength among the people.
Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph, say la.
So he goes back, talks about whose people are, but the verse I want to focus on on those three is this one, Psalm 7713.
It says, thy way, O God, is where?
It's in the sanctuary.
If you go to a church and they have not taught you the sanctuary message,
You gotta make sure you push some buttons and get that thing taught.
Nothing gives you peace like understanding the sanctuary message.
It shows you how God is working on your behalf.
And as you pass through the sanctuary, isn't it interesting to get into the outer courtyard of the sanctuary?
You can see the picture there.
The men standing there are going to the outer courtyard.
To go in there, it says to enter into his gates with praise and into his courts with thanksgiving.
It's a sanctuary prayer.
Just to get inside the gate, you're supposed to go in thanking and praising God.
Then the next thing you do, as you can see, you see the brazen altar, sin has to be dealt with.
His way is in the sanctuary.
Understanding the sanctuary message gives you
not just a hope, it gives you an assurance of salvation.
The reason so many people don't know if they're saved, they don't feel like they're saved is because they don't know the high priest who is working right now in the heavenly sanctuary.
The third one, you're making a shift?
Question everything but God.
You can question everything else, don't question God.
Here it is.
Psalm 7716 says, the water saw thee, O God.
The water saw thee.
They were afraid.
The depths also were troubled.
The clouds poured out water.
The sky sent out a sound.
Than airs also went abroad.
The thunder came.
The lightning came.
The red sea split.
Verse 18, the voice of thy thunder was in heaven.
The lightnings lightened the world.
The earth trembled and shook.
This gives you insight into what it was like when the Red Sea opened up for the children of Israel to walk apart.
It didn't just pull up.
There was a catastrophic storm that came, whirlwind, lightning, thunder.
They were questioning Moses as to why he brought them there.
And soon they probably weren't even afraid as much of Pharaoh as they were of what was going on around them.
But here it is for the fourth lesson.
This verse again, Psalm 77.16.
The water saw thee, oh God, the water saw thee, and the waters were afraid.
The depths were also troubled.
Here's the lesson, number four, remember that what you fear, fears God.
Remember that what you fear, fears God.
Some of us fear death, you know, death fears God.
You know that when Jesus came out of the tomb, he took with him the keys to death and to grave.
He took it with him.
And if I'm in Christ, that thing can never have total control over me.
Death for the Christian is just a power nap.
That's all it is.
Verse 19, thy way is in the sea and thy path in the great waters and thy footsteps are not known.
And that fifth lesson is this one.
Faith grows when there are no footprints.
You see, if God made it obvious which step to take next, if he made it obvious what was gonna happen next, you would not grow faith.
Your faith would not develop.
So what happens is that God puts up, you sometimes can't see which way, and that's why you need the word of God.
It becomes the light unto your feet.
Right?
That's what the word of God becomes.
And so you don't see the footprints.
So it forces you to develop a faith and a trust in God, which makes you move from having a mindset where you deal with God weekly to you deal with God moment by moment.
Back to Exodus 14 to wrap up.
Here it is.
Verse 15.
And the Lord said unto Moses, wherefore cries thou unto me.
God said, listen, Moses, what you complaining to me for about these people?
Speak to the children of Israel that they do what?
Go forward.
Lift up your rod and stretch out your hand over the sea and divide it.
And the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of the sea.
And I behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians and they shall follow them.
And I will get me honor upon Pharaoh and upon all his hosts.
and upon his chariots and upon his horsemen, and the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots and upon his horsemen."
He said, what are you complaining for?
Don't look back at Pharaoh.
Go forward.
Stop looking back.
The problem some of us have is we spend our whole lives looking behind us.
Look forward.
God has great things in store for you.
But you got to move forward because number six in making this prayer shift is this.
Remember that God's purpose is bigger than your problem.
God's purpose is bigger than your problem.
From the book, patriarchs and prophets, it says this, God and his providence brought the Hebrews into the mountain fastness before the sea.
that he might manifest his power in their deliverance and signally humble the pride of their oppressors.
He might have saved them in any other way, but he chose this method in order to test their faith and strengthen their trust in him.
If you are standing in front of the Red Sea in your life right now and on either side are unscalable mountains and Pharaoh is closing in behind you.
God has brought you to that place in your life right now.
to test your faith and to strengthen your trust in him.
The last one is this one, Psalm 7720 says, you led your people like a flock by the hands of Moses and Aaron.
And what you got to remember when you pray and you don't make the prayer shift is this, the Lord is still your shepherd.
He still is.
When you suffer, he suffers.
Psalm 58 David says,
He takes our tears and he collects them in a bottle.
Says he takes them and writes them in a book.
People tell me, well, God doesn't care what's happening to me.
Where is God?
I say, you don't know right now.
He is weeping with you and writing it down in a book in heaven.
And guess what?
One day when I stand before him, my Bible tells me he's going to wipe every tear from your eyes.
You know what?
That means that he is going to go back and each one of us is going to have an experience with God, where he relives how he lived the pain with you and remove it from you forever.
Patriarchs and prophets, again, the great lesson here taught is for all time.
Often the Christian life is beset by dangers and duty seems hard to perform.
The imagination pictures impending ruin before bondage or death behind.
Yet the voice of God speaks.
Clearly go forward.
We should obey this command.
Even though our eyes cannot penetrate the darkness and we feel the cold waves about our feet.
Even though you're standing there at the front of the Red Sea in your life right now.
And life seems unbearable.
And it seems difficult and you can feel the cold water of your trials washing up on your feet as if there is nowhere to go.
You know what God is still saying to you?
Go forward.
The obstacles that hinder our progress will never disappear before a halting, doubting spirit.
Those who defer obedience till every shadow of uncertainty disappears and there remains no risk of failure or defeat will never obey at all.
Unbelief, doubt, whispers, let us wait till the obstructions are removed and we can see our way clearly, but faith courageously urges in advance, hoping all things, believing all things.
Church, make the prayer shift.
In 2026, pray like people who believe and trust God.
Pray like people who know that he can deliver even from Red Sea experiences.
Pray and believe.
And if you can pray and believe, our God can deliver.
He opened up the Red Sea for them, whatever you're facing right now, he can remove it.
Remember that what you fear, fears God.
I remember working and as a doctor in a town called Weedowee, Alabama.
I was a resident physician and I needed to make extra money to pay my loans.
And so I was training in Aniston, Alabama, and I would drive down to Wadawi.
And I remember forgetting the first time I went, when you got to the hospital, it was a little country hospital, rural Alabama, dry county, they didn't even have alcohol in the county.
And when you got there, the check to pay you was sitting on the glass when you got there.
I said, this is my kind of job.
And I'll never forget I got there.
And I met the nurses.
One of the nurses pulled me aside and they said, you know, Dr. Walsh, you're the first black doctor we've ever had at this hospital ever.
And I was like, oh, okay.
As long as the check on the window, I really don't care.
I ain't gonna lie.
And she said, yeah, yeah.
She said, in fact, you know, just want to let you know, maybe she was trying to scare me.
I don't know.
She said, you know, the Ku Klux Klan marched there about two weeks ago.
I said, really?
She said, yeah.
I said, is that check gonna still be sitting there when I come back?
I'm not worried about the clan, I just want my check.
She said, she couldn't believe it, she just moved away.
A few weeks into working there, I was having a good time, all the younger nurses were amazing, we had a great time and taught college football and stuff.
And one night I was working and a woman came in, this woman was 42, I'll never forget this lady, 42 years old and she grew up on Southern food and smoked cigarettes and drank beer and had fun.
When she was a teenager, she was a cheerleader.
We're telling me that.
And it was very active.
And so she said she'd gained all his weight and she wanted to get back in shape.
So she went to the gym and she just jumped on a treadmill.
Her and her guy friend went with her.
And so she went to the gym, she jumped on the treadmill and started running at full speed.
She hadn't run in years.
And she was on there running.
And within minutes, she started having sub-sternal
crushing chest pain.
She got lightheaded.
She got nauseous.
She passed out on the treadmill and the thing threw her onto the floor at a gym.
They called 911 and the ambulance showed up at the hospital and it was like I drew the unlucky straw.
I was the one working in that hospital that night.
And the way that hospital work, you were not only the emergency room doctor, you had to cover all the beds in the back of the hospital and you had to cover the clinic till six o'clock.
And so I'm there busy as we were, and this ambulance pulls up and tells me the story.
And I'm like, oh my goodness, this woman is dying of a heart attack.
And so we put her in the room.
We start Mona, right?
There's a whole medication cascade you give to try and open up the vessels.
We put her on that.
We hook her up to the monitor.
And when I see the monitor, it is tombstone sign.
Huge SD segment elevation on an EKG.
The woman is having a catastrophic myocardial infarction and death is eminent.
I look at the woman and this is the first time I think, ooh, the clan marched.
Now what happens if this lady dies and she's one of their relatives or something?
So one of the rad techs, the x-ray tech, and I were really cool.
So he had been studying the Bible on his own.
He was a Southern Baptist and he came just by studying the Bibles and he said, I came to the conclusion.
He told me before he knew what I believe, he said, I came to the conclusion that the seven days of Sabbath.
He said, so I keep the Sabbath and I go to church on Sunday because I read in the Bible.
And once we got the woman comfortable on the table, I said, listen, you go in the back and you pray.
I said, I need you to go back there and pray.
I call Birmingham, talk to the cardiologist.
I gave TPA a clock busting medicine.
I gave it to the lady and I was watching the monitor and it went from the tombstone stone signs.
And within a few seconds, the thing flatlined.
I said, precious Lord, take my hand, lead me on.
And I started praying.
I said, Lord, what am I going to do?
And I remember praying.
I said, Lord, I don't care if you have to put a Lazarus right now, Lord.
But this lady's got to be alive when I leave this place tonight.
And I started to call on the name of God.
I had a prayer shift moment.
And church, let me tell you something.
Within seconds, her monitor went to normal sinus rhythm.
Perfectly normal.
So normal that I said to one of the nurses, I said, give her two more milligrams of morphine.
We don't give morphine for pain.
We give morphine because it dilates the vessels after the heart, decreases the work the heart has to do.
I said, give her two more milligrams of morphine.
We're waiting for the helicopter to come take her to Birmingham.
And the man who was with her from the gym runs into the emergency room where he's not supposed to be.
And he shouts, don't give her any more morphine.
She don't need any more morphine.
That woman, church that was dead just a few seconds earlier, sat up on the bed, looked me in the face and said, that man is not my husband.
Give me the morphine.
A couple of weeks later, talking about a prayer shift.
A couple of weeks later, that lady came back to the hospital.
And that lady threw her arms around me, held on to me tight, and she thanked me.
Let me tell you something.
I have found mightily, power comes with prayer.
I have seen miracle after miracle after miracle.
And I'm telling you, you, some of us are afraid of the Egyptians.
Some might be afraid of the Klan.
I'm not afraid of anybody because I've got God in my corner.
My wife sings this song.
Maybe there's,
something you're going through.
I wanna make it just a special appeal.
Just meet me down front and we're gonna pray.
Father God, we thank you that you still answer prayers.
We thank you, God, that we are here in our right minds.
We thank you, Father God, that despite our failures, you still come and rescue us.
We thank you, Father God, because we're not worthy of your mercy or your grace.
Yet Lord, you pour it out in unmeasured amounts.
Lord, even when we fall, you are there to pick us up.
Yes, Lord.
And we thank you.
Yes, thank you.
Lord, we ask that you forgive us of our sin, Lord.
Wash us in your blood.
Cleanse us, Lord, from all unrighteousness.
Lord, help us to shake off the sin that does so easily beset us.
Yes.
And Lord, we claim the promise.
The promises of Scripture, Psalm 3419, that many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all.
Amen.
Father God, we are asking for deliverance today.
We claim the promise today, Lord, Psalm 30 in verse two, David says, I cried unto the Lord and He healed me.
Some of us in here, Lord, we need healing right now.
And we're going to stand on the promise that you're going to do what you said you can do, Lord.
And then Father God, I've reclaimed the promise that Lord,
your word cannot go out and come back void.
And I claim that promise over Eden Valley, Lord.
The right arm of this great gospel.
And I pray right now, Lord, that as they plan and develop this property, that Father God, the holy angels themselves would be a part of the instruction, that the holy spirit would fill every mind as they come up with ideas and that Lord, you would supply all of Eden Valley's needs according to your riches in glory.
that Lord, until you come, people would come here and find miracle-working natural remedies and find the Holy Spirit dwelling here.
And Father God, as we leave now, bless the rest of our Sabbath.
Be with each family, be with each child.
Lord, save our children.
You have promised that in Isaiah 49, 25, save our children, Lord.
This is our prayer in Jesus' precious and holy name.
Let the church say amen.
And amen, you may be seated.
Father God, we thank You that You still answer prayers.
We thank You, God, that we are here in our right minds.
We thank You, Father God, that despite our failures, You still come and rescue us.
We thank You, Father God, because we're not worthy of Your mercy or Your grace.
Yet, Lord, You pour it out in unmeasured amounts.
Lord, even when we fall, You are there to pick us up.
Yes, Lord.
And we thank You.
Lord, we ask that you forgive us of our sin, Lord.
Wash us in your blood.
Cleanse us, Lord, from all unrighteousness.
Lord, help us to shake off the sin that does so easily beset us.
And Lord, we claim the promise.
The promises of Scripture, Psalm 3419, many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all.
Father God, we're asking for deliverance today.
We claim the promise today Lord, Psalm 30 in verse two, David says, I cried unto the Lord and He healed me.
Some of us in here Lord, we need healing right now.
And we're going to stand on the promise that you're going to do what you said you can do Lord.
And then Father God, I've reclaimed the promise that Lord,
your word cannot go out and come back void.
And I claim that promise over Eden Valley, Lord.
The right arm of this great gospel.
And I pray right now, Lord, that as they plan and develop this property, that Father God, the holy angels themselves would be a part of the instruction, that the holy spirit would fill every mind as they come up with ideas, and that Lord, you would supply all of Eden Valley's needs according to your riches in glory.
that, Lord, until you come, people would come here and find miracle-working natural remedies and find the Holy Spirit dwelling here.
And Father God, as we leave now, bless the rest of our Sabbath.
Be with each family.
Be with each child.
Lord, save our children.
You have promised that in Isaiah 49, 25, save our children, Lord.
This is our prayer in Jesus' precious and holy name.
Let the church say amen and amen.
This media was brought to you by Audioverse, a website dedicated to spreading God's word through free sermon audio and much more.
If you would like to know more about Audioverse, or if you would like to listen to more sermons, please visit www.audioverse.org.